.TH AMBER 1 "2026-07-11" "amber 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
amber \- dependency garbage collector for Rust
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B amber
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fIPATH\fR]
[\fICOMMAND\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B amber
analyzes a Cargo project, detects how each third-party crate is used, scores
every dependency for replaceability, and generates validated, drop-in
replacement modules for common utility crates.
.PP
Generated replacements are emitted as
.BI amber_ <crate> _redux
modules and are checked with
.B cargo check
before they are reported, so a proposal that does not compile never reaches
you. Crate names containing hyphens are normalised to underscores in the
module name.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-f " format" "\fR, \fB\-\-format " format
Output format: \fBconsole\fR (default), \fBjson\fR, \fBpr\fR, \fBsarif\fR, or
\fBemoji\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-emoji
Shorthand for \fB\-\-format emoji\fR.
.TP
.BI \-t " n" "\fR, \fB\-\-threshold " n
Minimum replaceability score (0\-100) a dependency must reach to be flagged.
Used with \fB\-\-propose\fR to control proposal volume. Default: 50.
.TP
.B \-T\fR, \fB\-\-transitive
Include transitive dependencies in the report.
.TP
.B \-p\fR, \fB\-\-propose
After scoring, generate validated replacement modules for every dependency at
or above \fB\-\-threshold\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-dev
Exclude dev-dependencies from analysis.
.TP
.BI \-c " crates" "\fR, \fB\-\-crates " crates
Restrict analysis to the named crates. Accepts a comma-separated list or
repeated flags.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " path
Path to an Amber configuration file. Defaults to
.B .amber.toml
in the target project root.
.TP
.B \-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR ...
Increase verbosity. Repeat for more detail (\fB\-v\fR debug, \fB\-vv\fR trace).
.TP
.B \-h\fR, \fB\-\-help
Print help. \fB\-h\fR prints a summary; \fB\-\-help\fR prints the full text.
.TP
.B \-V\fR, \fB\-\-version
Print the version.
.PP
When built with the \fBlibrary\fR feature, \fB\-\-library\fR / \fB\-\-no\-library\fR
toggle the Padagonia replacement library. When built with the \fBonline\fR
feature, \fB\-\-online\fR fetches live crates.io metadata.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B analyze
Run the full pipeline and emit a report in the selected \fB\-\-format\fR.
Exits non-zero in strict mode when a policy is violated. Supports
.BI \-o " file"
to write the report to a file.
.TP
.BI score " crate"
Score one crate across usage simplicity, transitive value, security,
maintenance, testability, and API surface, then print the breakdown.
.TP
.B list
List all dependencies with usage statistics.
.TP
.BI replace " crate" " [\fB\-o\fR dir]"
Generate a validated
.BI amber_ <crate> _redux
module and write it under the output directory (default
.BR amber_out ).
.TP
.B roadmap
Show Amber's internal module roadmap.
.TP
.BI directives " crate" " [\fB\-o\fR file]"
Emit a focused, implementation-ready directive describing how to replace the
named crate.
.TP
.B library
(\fBlibrary\fR feature) Manage the Padagonia replacement module library:
\fBlist\fR, \fBimport\fR, \fBexport\fR.
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.TP
.B console
Human-readable table (default).
.TP
.B json
Machine-readable report for tooling.
.TP
.B pr
Markdown suitable for a pull-request comment.
.TP
.B sarif
Static Analysis Results Interchange Format, for CI ingestion.
.TP
.B emoji
Compact, friendly summary.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B amber
reads
.B .amber.toml
from the target project root (or the path given to \fB\-\-config\fR):
.PP
.RS
.nf
threshold = 60

[policy]
required = ["serde"]
forbidden = ["deprecated_crate"]
strict = false
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success; no policy violations.
.TP
.B 1
Analysis found policy violations (strict mode).
.TP
.B 2
A command, parse, or I/O error occurred.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B .amber.toml
Per-project configuration.
.TP
.B amber_out/
Default directory for generated replacement modules.
.TP
.B docs/man/amber.1
This manual page.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls tracing output. Demos set \fBRUST_LOG=error\fR for clean frames.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
# Analyze the current project
amber

# Machine-readable report of a specific project
amber \-\-format json /path/to/project

# Propose replacements for high-scoring crates
amber \-\-propose \-\-threshold 70

# Score a single crate
amber score anyhow

# Generate a validated replacement module
amber replace serde \-\-out-dir out

# Scoped replacement directive for CI review
amber directives colored \-o colored.md
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cargo (1)
.PP
Reproducible demo recordings: \fBdocs/vhs/README.md\fR.
Project documentation index: \fBdocs/README.md\fR.
.SH LIMITATIONS
.TP
\(bu
Usage analysis is syntax-only: method calls whose receiver type is not
visibly imported cannot be attributed to a crate, and macro-expanded or
generated code is invisible.
.TP
\(bu
Replacement validation is compile-only (\fBcargo check\fR); it does not prove
behavioural equivalence. Run the target project's tests after adopting a
replacement.
.TP
\(bu
Compile-time and binary-size estimates are heuristics, not measurements.
.TP
\(bu
Offline scoring uses neutral metadata defaults; maintenance/download data
needs the \fBonline\fR feature, and CVE counts need the RustSec advisory
database.
.SH AUTHOR
Amber contributors. MIT licence.
